---
title: Issuing Certificates & Bonds
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Issuing Certificates & Bonds
    description: TBD
---

AS DISCUSSED in the earlier section, the trustees may issue certificates of beneficial or capital interest, or other obligations to any person whom they please.154 There are a total of 100 units of beneficial interest, and a separate total of 100 units of capital interest in the trust. The trustees determine the number of units (percentage of total interest) to be held by any one beneficiary, and may issue the full 100 units (100%) to a single beneficiary. To issue a certificate of either interest, the trustees must act jointly as the Board of Trustees, unless there is only one trustee for the trust. They must execute (draw up and indorse under seal155), then deliver to the interest-holder(s) the actual certificate(s) evidencing the interest held. The Board should also record minutes of the meeting(s) in which it was resolved to issue the interest, and then record the act along with the interest-holder(s)’ identification information in the appropriate schedule. 

With certificates of capital interest the method is much different, though the procedure is the same as that for the trust certificates. Capital certificates work based upon exchange with investors called Exchangers, who may be any person the Board of Trustees wishes to exchange with. The Board of Trustees determines the number of units to issue in exchange for the property proposed for investment into the trust. This is a pure barter between the parties, and whatever number of units is agreed stands as the value in exchange for the proposed property.156 The exchanger must issue a written Proposal (an example of which is provided in the sample forms section), which must be accepted by the Board of Trustees. Any negotiations which take place should be recorded in the minutes in which it is resolved to either issue the interest or refuse the proposal. If the Board of Trustees has resolved to issue the interest and make the exchange, the certificate(s) must be executed and delivered to the interest-holder(s), and the property(ies) in exchange must be delivered by the interest-holder(s) to the Board of Trustees. The final act should be recorded along with the interest-holder(s)’ information, and the property inventoried, in their respective schedules. 

With bonds, because a bond is merely an obligation or promise to pay money or to do some act upon the occurrence of certain circumstances, the trust need only issue the bond according to the particular transaction, e.g., to back the performance of a particular contract, to raise capital from outside investors in the form of “IOU’s,” etc. The distinguishing feature of a bond is that the document shows an obligation to pay some fixed amount of money or services, at a definite time, with stated interest. (I have provided some samples for various uses in the sample forms section.) 

Now, there is no rule against a trustee (or agent) of the trust, exchanging his individual property for capital interest in the trust. And there is no rule against the trustee (or agent) holding beneficial interest either, though the holding of beneficial interest is generally regarded with greater suspicion than that regarding capital interest. The actual rule is that either transaction will be sustained as non-voidable if it clearly appears free of fraud, concealment, or undue advantage.157 Any omission by the trustee (or agent) to disclose any material fact of the deal which is learned by the trustee by virtue of his office, and any misrepresentation, concealment, or other disregard of condition renders the issuance, exchange, and contract for it voidable at the option of the beneficial interest-holder(s). And one can wager that any accusation of invalidity of the trust by an outside party will be made on those grounds as well—a manifestation of the general suspicion. 

This suspicion, however unreasonable without regard to the particular merits of the individual situation, stems from the many Express Trusts successfully dismantled based upon the unscrupulous and often foolish failing of the Control Test by trustees. In fact, the Express Trust graveyard is mostly populated with the dead corpuses of trusts who died from this mistake. When a trustee holds all or a majority of interest (beneficial or capital) in the trust, he is, in effect, an interest-holder exercising control over the affairs and res of the trust. He derives the sole benefit of his actions, and determines the actions which would cause him to derive that sole benefit. He is owner of the legal title to the trust property as trustee, as well as owner of the equitable title to the property as interest-holder. At best, the trust is his alter-ego, hence he may be proceeded against as though the trust does not even exist. This is why it is recommended that any transfers between trustee (or agent) and the trust (or interest-holder) be by sale as prescribed according to the guidelines, through a third party, or by outright exchange, with all documents in support of the transaction ready to repel the outside party who might attempt to come in under the guise of the Express Trust’s Grim Reaper. 

---

154It should be noted that a beneficial interest-holder, having such an interest in the trust property, has an inherent right to insist, in proper proceedings, that the trust be maintained and executed according to the terms of the trust instrument. At law, the trustees are considered the owners of the trust property, yet, in equity, the beneficial interest-holders are the absolute owners, hence their power to apply for the voiding of a voidable transaction or transfer of property as mentioned in the preceding section. See Hill v. Hill, 152 P. 1122; Ex Parte Jones, 186 Ala. 567, 64 So. 960; and Cox v. Cox, 95 Va. 173, 27 S.E. 834. And a beneficiary may apply to the court of equity to enforce their rights. See Bingham v. Graham, 220 S.W. 105. 
155All certificates and official documents should be executed under seal. The sealing of an instrument is prima facie evidence that it has been duly executed. See Johnson v. Crawley, supra; and Mullanphy v. Schott, supra.
156We have already covered the nature of the certificates in that previous section, so we won’t reexamine it here.157See Murry v. King, 153 Mo.App. 710, 135 S.W. 107; and Mills v. Mills, 63 Fed. 511 (C.C.Or. 1894). 