---
title: Understanding Commerce
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Understanding Commerce
    description: TBD
---
HERE IS WHERE we begin to address the Express Trust in action. As shown above, the trust may engage in all manner of trade and commerce,123 but before taking the step of doing so, the reader would greatly benefit the trust by understanding the nature of commerce in twenty-first century America. And for my brief explanation of the subtle intricacies involved, I will rely upon the two works by Lee Brobst et al.124 I will not go into a detailed explanation of the constitution or the history of commerce for want of space, but I would suggest that the reader read the works relied upon herein. 

When the trustee is engaging in trade or commerce in behalf of the trust, acting under general common law, the trust is within the jurisdiction over which the literal and absolute protections of the Bill of Rights extend, and he has no direct contact with the federal government. And, under right of contract law protected under the Federal Constitution, the trustee may enter into the 14th Amendment jurisdiction via contract, i.e., by willfully availing the trust of benefits like the quasi-corporate privilege/franchise of limited liability for the discharge of debts with Federal Reserve Notes under H.J. Res. 192. (Contrast this with the payment of debts with standard gold-backed currency under the original Coinage Act of 1792.) Under this jurisdiction, the federal government (Congress) has full and direct contact with the trust, “as they see fit, for the benefit of public policy regulations (known as codes & statutes) of this jurisdiction.”125 This makes the federal government a third-party intervenor in the affairs of the trust by operation of law,126 because the trust (as with the 14th Amendment citizens) is being allowed to get away with not truly fulfilling its commercial contracts as is required under the common law of contracts. (I will show how this can all be avoided, in a later section.) 

The resulting nexus or “confederacy developed under [H.J. Res. 192] . . . is an affiliation known better as an association[127].” “And the ‘common enterprise’ of this unincorporated society, is to offer all Americans a so-called ‘privilege,’ in the form of what is better known as a ‘[quasi-contract],’ to participate in commerce without  payment of debts. The choice of law is up to each person still.”129 

With corporations, they are “artificial creations of the state or federal government under physical charter (franchise) issued via state or federal civil law for commercial regulation under Article I Section 8 [C]lauses 1 & 3. They are not under the literal common law because of the charter (franchise). Any legal action against the corporation is legally called an ‘in rem’ action, because it is against the thing or property (also called res) of the corporation under charter. The courts have automatic subject[-]matter jurisdiction, because the physical charter is the subject[-]matter.”130 

“Under the letter of the constitutional law there is no commercial regulation, but [H.J. Res. 192] . . . along with 15 USC brought in a third party for commercial regulation for the social security public policy. Remember, ‘equity compels performance.’ The law views unincorporated associations as a danger to the substance of the common law, because of their debt/credit system. This is because there is no counter[-]balance to the demands the association puts on the substance of the earth, thus the reason for all the federal and state regulatory agencies. In other words, there is a presumption by implication in the civil law that a charter (a metaphysical/abstract/unreal type) exists, because persons are availing themselves (volunteering) of the privileges pertaining to [H.J. Res. 192]. Therefore, these persons come under a ‘quasi in rem’ jurisdiction of the civil law in order to regulate, control (including compel) those that are outside the literal common[-]law principles.”131 

The many participants under this system, especially the 14th Amendment citizens from each state, together form an unincorporated federation of state associations operating under interstate commerce as addressed in Article IV § 3 cl. 2, and reinforced by the landmark Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins132 decision. This is the basis for the federal government’s, including state governments’, compulsion of persons to its public international law (i.e., the spirit, not the letter, of the common law mixed with public Roman civil law, under Law of Nations per Article I § 8 cl. 3 and 10, and Article VI cl. 2) 
nowadays commonly known as codes and statutes (state or federal), to regulate everything as a matter of commerce.133 

Without getting into the history of religion, and speaking purely from an analytical perspective, the Roman civil law, as a base-model for commerce regulation, was developed out of necessity of the church to avoid political scrutiny for its handling of ever increasing amounts of precious metals. It had become a “‘storehouse’ for the money and property the people were persuaded to give in exchange for limited liability [in the form of tithing] — [i.e.,] go directly to heaven instead of hell. As the people became more educated and saw what was really behind the power of religion [in generating wealth], the Roman Church fell under greater and greater criticism. This led to the development of a banking system to handle and control church wealth and take the critical focus [away from the church.]”134 

“The bank learned from the church about limited liability. If you could get people to borrow money beyond their ability to pay back, you could get them to keep performing [paying interest in one form or another] on a debt (liability) without ever demanding it [the principal] back, thereby, loaning out that same credit to more than one individual or company. This meant that the bank was limiting the liability of the borrower so he was not fully responsible for the debt as long as he continued to perform to paying the interest. This way[,] real money (gold) became credit (paper money) by loaning to more than one person. Being involved in this sort of commerce was called ‘private commerce.’ With the church’s control over wealth, this private commerce became standard practice in world trade upon the sea — private international or admiralty/maritime law became known as Roman civil law as it began to figure heavily in the politics of every city and country it touched through international commerce.”135 

By operation of this body of law, all persons subject to its jurisdiction are regarded as vessels, having a distinct quasi-corporate, juridical personality, capable of suing and being sued in rem.136 14th Amendment citizens of the United States, whether state or federal chartered corporations or metaphysical-chartered corporate-colored public persons, therefore, are public vessels of the United States within the broad meaning of the Public Vessels Act, and are regulated. The United States, as with the Roman Church, is the “ship of state”. The Express Trust, then, is a private vessel of the united States of America, navigating through the often hostile waters called interstate commerce (which is international commerce via the United States treaties). 

123“The words ‘commerce’ and ‘trade’ are often used interchangeably; but, strictly speaking, commerce relates to intercourse or dealings with foreign nations, states, or political communities, while trade denotes business intercourse or mutual traffic within the limits of a state or nation, or the buying, selling, and exchanging of articles between members of the same community.” Black’s Law Dictionary, p. 336 (4th ed. Rev. 1968).
124supra, see footnotes 12 and 28. 
125The Law, the Money and Your Choice, p. 3. 
126The federal government’s power of regulation in this manner is fully constitutional, deriving its authority from art. I, § 8, cl. 1 and 8, being one of the general legislative powers. The relationship between congress and the 14th amendment citizen is controlled under art. IV, § 3, cl. 2 because there is no physical federal or state charter issued to regulate the relationship. 
127Brobst et al., supra at pp. 7-8. An association is defined as “[a]n unincorporated society; a body of persons united and acting together without a charter, but upon the methods and forms used by incorporated bodies for the prosecution of some common enterprise.” Black’s Law Dictionary, p. 156 (4th ed. Rev. 1968).
128Brobst et al., Id.
129Id. 
130Id. at p. 9. 
131Id. at pp. 9-10. 
132304 U.S. 64 (1938).
133This can be better understood from Propeller Genesee Chief v. Fitzhugh, 53 U.S. 443, 451-453 (1851), wherein the court said that, within the letter of the constitution, “[t]he law contains no regulations of commerce. . . . It merely confers a new jurisdiction on the district courts; and this is its only object and purpose. . . . It is evident . . . that Congress, in passing [the law], did not intend to exercise their power to regulate commerce. . . . The statutes do no more than grant jurisdiction over a particular class of cases. . . . Now the judicial power in cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, has never been supposed to extend to contracts made on land and to be executed on land. But if the power of regulating commerce can be made the foundation of jurisdiction in its courts, and a new and extended admiralty jurisdiction beyond its heretofore known and admitted limits, may be created on water under that authority, the same reason would justify the same exercise of power on land.”; also see Verlinden v. Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 496 (1983). Roman civil law is also why the I.R.S. continually refers to income taxes as voluntary although, to the ignorant, it appears to be the exact opposite.
134U.S.A. The Republic, Is The House That No One Lives In, p. 9. 
135Id. 
136See The China, 74 U.S. 53 (1868); and The Barnstable, 181 U.S. 464 (1901). Also see Why We Are in Admiralty (April 18, 2004), available at <http://www.wealth4freedom.com/law/Admiralty.htm> (last visited Sept. 30, 2005). 