---
title: Declaration of The Express Trust
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Declaration of The Express Trust
    description: The various types of trusts.
---

THE DECLARATION OF TRUST is the trust instrument that constitutes the trust. It has been noted in trust law that no technical expressions are required to create a valid declaration, so long as the words used make clear the settlor’s intent to create the trust or confer a benefit of some sort that would be best carried out by means of a trust.14 A trust instrument doesn’t necessarily need to be a declaration either, for a trust may be, and often is, formed out of a simple agreement or even a will.15 But with an Express Trust, the declaration has been preferred since the beginnings of trusts under the common law of England. This is where careful attention to detail is most crucial, because in order to properly construe the intent of the settlor, the objects, property, and manner in which all is to be carried out, the terms and provisions must be set forth in unambiguous, precise language so as to particularly create the Express Trust; and where the intent of the settlor is unclear, under equity, interpretation is required to construe the intent of the parties, and the trust may, depending on the degree of ambiguity, be deemed invalid.16 However, when all is done properly, obviously there can be no lawful impairment of the obligations of contract created thereby.17 

Moreover, the declaration, by its terms and provisions, serves to establish the entire contractual arrangement, including the identities and positions of the parties, the trust’s name, jurisdiction and situs, and all particulars of administration, all of which the courts of equity will fully support by the principle that equity compels performance.18 The ultimate result is the creation of a bona fide legal entity,19 having a separate and distinct juridical personality,20 standing to sue and be sued21 and to function as a natural (contrasted with artificial) person in commerce by and through its trust officers. The term natural person has been applied to Express Trusts by courts of equity because of its mode of creation and administration, being by way of the exercise of natural rights and not franchises (i.e., civil rights).22 However, this implied right of contract of the trust is alienable, whereas its creators’ right of contract is unalienable.23 But it nevertheless possesses inter alia the right to all enjoyments stemming from the contracts into which it enters, as well as all the obligations imposed under such contracts. Needless to say, the Express Trust possesses the ability to own property, engage in business transactions, and to incur liabilities (including tax liabilities depending on the activity which renders it liable to pay the tax, which I will get into in a later section). 

---

12 See Lee Brobst et al., U.S.A. The Republic, Is The House That No One Lives In, available at <http://www.usa-the-republic.com/Lee%20Brobst/USA%20The%20Republic.htm> (last visited Aug. 6, 2005). 13This is sometimes referred to as the trust indenture for the purpose of denoting that it outlines the terms and conditions governing the conduct of the trustee (referred to in this sense as an indenture trustee) as an indentured servant to the beneficiary under contractual arrangement. 
14 See Underhill, supra at art. 3, p. 10; also see Chicago M. & St. PR. Co. v. Des Moines Union R. Co., 254 U.S. 196, 65 L.Ed. 219 (1920). 
15 Underhill on Trusts, art. 5, p. 19 (Lond. ed. 1878).  
16 Id. at p. 11. 
17 See the Constitution for the United States of America, art. I, § 10 (1789): “No State shall . . . pass any . . . Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts[.]” 
18 See Clews v. Jamieson, 182 U.S. 461, 21 S.Ct. 845, 45 L.Ed. 1183 (1901). 
19 See Burnett v. Smith, S.W. 1007 (1922); and Muir v. C.I.R., 182 F.2d 819 (C.A.4 1950).20 See Brigham vs. U.S., 38 F.Supp. 625 (D.C.Mass. 1941), appeal dismissed 122 F.2d 792 (reported in Title 26 I.R.C. 31, p. 356). 
21 See Waterman v. MacKenzie, 138 U.S. 252 (1891). 
22 The trustee(s) of an Express Trust are protected under the Constitution as “citizens” throughout the continental United States. The trustee(s) under a will or declaration of an Express Trust are natural persons, “citizens” within the meaning of Article IV, Section 2 of the Constitution, and are therefore entitled to all the “privileges and immunities” of same. Paul v. Virginia, 75 U.S. 168 (1868). Even though, in today’s economic situation, the term “citizen” is presumed to signify the 14th Amendment citizen, the term cannot be applied to the Express Trust which is specifically created under the original common law. The trust is a natural person because of how and by whom it was created. And even under common law, the officers having natural rights, acting for a corporation can only do what they are permitted to do by the state in which they seek to act, because they are not such “citizens” entitled to those “privileges and immunities,” and hence the foreign corporation statutes of the several states. Corporations, as artificial persons, are “citizens of the United States,” within the meaning of the 14th Amendment, which should give the reader an idea of the meaning of the term person as primarily used today. See Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific R. Co., 118 U.S. 394, 396 (1886). 