---
title: Transfering Trust Assets
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Transfering Trust Assets
    description: TBD
---
THERE ARE two principal ways to transfer assets into the trust. It may be done via sale (in funds) or by exchange (based on the barter system). How it is done in any given situation makes all the difference, and there are certain guidelines to follow to insure that the transfer cannot be nullified and voided. 

As a general rule, the trustee, as owner of legal title to the trust property, cannot purchase the trust property for himself, nor convert it to his own use contrary to the trust instrument. This is generally regardless of whether the property was purchased at a public, private or judicial sale, instituted by him,147 for he has the unfair advantage, and any such sale, absent certain conditions, is deemed voidable ab initio, to be set aside at the option of the beneficiary(s). The only way the property may be obtained is where it can be shown that the beneficiary(s) acted intelligently, willfully, and without undue influence arising from the trust relationship.148 In order to sustain a sale of trust property by the trustee to himself individually (on the ground that the interest-holder consented thereto) the evidence must show the good faith of the transaction, the adequacy of the consideration, a full knowledge of the facts, and an independent consent on the part of the interest-holder.149 He may, of course, buy trust property in the discharge of his duty to protect the trust.150 These same principles apply to the selling of the trustee’s individual property to the trust, as well as to any barter between trustee and trust. (In the case of exchange there is an additional option which the trust provides, though it is not usually advisable to do so.) Simply put, if the contract is evidently “fair and reasonable, untainted by fraud and undue influence, [the] . . . conveyance of . . . property [by the trustee sui juris to the trust or interest-holder sui juris, or vise versa] will be upheld.”151 
The guidelines152 for insuring that any transaction or property transfer between the trustee (or an agent) and the trust (or interest-holder) is non-voidable are that— 
* The seller intends that the buyer shall buy, and the buyer intends that the seller shall sell, or both parties intend that each shall exchange one item for the other; 
* The seller, especially if trustee, discloses to the buyer before the contract is made every fact he has learned in his fiduciary relation which is material to the sale or exchange; 
* The seller, especially if trustee, exercises the utmost good faith in the transaction; 
* No advantage is taken by misrepresentation, concealment of or omission to disclose important information gained as trustee (or agent); and 
* The entire transaction is fair and open on its face. 
Furthermore, the contract of transfer need not be a complex document, so long as the guidelines are strictly followed, with all necessary warranties made in the documents themselves in order to legitimize the deal. (I have provided a sample bill of sale and asset purchase agreement in the sample forms section.) 

What’s more, there is an additional method by which the deal may be completed. This is by way of assignment— either of trustee compensation, venture proceeds or profits, or even the trustee’s separate employment wages/salary to the trust as value consideration in the contract of transfer. Whatever the object assigned, that the value consideration shall be in the form of an assignment should be set forth as an express term or provision in the documents evidencing the transfer.153 A trustee may issue a promissory note or bond to the trust, dividing his personal labor into shares of interest in his trustee compensation, wages, salary, etc., and assigning it to the trust in order to complete the contract. To do this, in addition to the note or bond, he must execute a formal assignment, and then give his employer, payor, etc. notice and instructions to send the instrument (check, money order, bills) to the trust, which is entitled to indorse the instrument in the name of the individual trustee per the assignment (an authorized signature). It may also be agreed that the trustee shall accept the payment personally, then deliver and sign over the instrument to the trust himself (a special indorsement). The former is akin to a private (quasi) garnishment, in which the employer, payor, etc. is noticed and instructed to send the payment(s) directly to the trust, or deposit the funds directly in the trust’s account per the assignment. (I have also provided a sample assignment and notice of assignment and instructions in the sample forms section.) 

---

147Since the trustee’s advantage comes by virtue of his office, it has been ruled that he may lawfully buy trust property at a sale caused by a third party, over which he has no part in procuring and over which he can exercise no control. See Steinbeck v. Bon Homme Mining Co., 152 Fed. 333 (C.C.A.8 (Colo.) 1907).148See Swift v. Craighead, 75 N.J.Eq. 102, 75 A. 974. 
149See Clay v. Thomas, 178 Ky. 199, 198 S.W. 762; and French v. French, 58 Ind.App. 621, 108 N.E. 786. 150See Hardwicke v. Wurmser, 180 S.W. 455; He may also apply to a court of equity, showing good cause, to obtain a decree for his purchasing of the property for protection purposes, if necessary. 
151Dunn, supra at ch. IV, § 44, p. 78. 
152Per Byrne v. Jones, 159 Fed. 321 (C.C.A.8 (Ark.) 1908). 
153It should be noted that such an assignment can be done without any contract of transfer, rendering the object of assignment a gift. But, given the trustee’s position, this is generally looked upon with great suspicion simply because of the absence of apparent value consideration for the trustee (the trustee would have to show that he gifted the thing in the spirit of charity and a warm heart, for instance). It gives the superficial appearance that the actual, ulterior motive was to avoid the liability of registered ownership, yet retain full and total ownership-in-fact, using the trust as a device to accomplish this. The property transfer must be a bona fide transfer on its face.