---
title: Doing Business
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Doing Business
    description: TBD
---

EVEN THOUGH the Express Trust is technically not a “business trust”137 within the established meaning of the term, this in no way prevents or inhibits the trust from engaging in all manner of business the trustee is permitted to under declaration, and it need only obtain the franchise of a business license if it anticipates doing express business in the above-described jurisdiction.138 The trust may operate a business, acquire a business, sell or otherwise dispose of its business, or even contract under the limited liability system and become a taxable entity—the choice is yours. The only thing which may bar the trust from conducting a particular kind of business in any certain jurisdiction is the public policy of that jurisdiction, regarding which, it has been admitted, most states have not passed upon the subject directly.139 

Regardless of the business, there is a due notice rule, which confers a duty upon the trustee under equity, whenever doing business. The rule consists of two parts:  

The first is that he should sufficiently distinguish and represent the nature of the trust to the party with whom he is doing business. It is of the utmost importance, in the forming of business contracts, that full disclosure be made—on all letterheads, business cards, checks, bills and order blanks, papers, etc.—so as to prevent any claims of lack of disclosure from arising in the future. But prudence recommends that a trustee must not disclose every immaterial fact regarding the trust, its declaration, and its affairs. The first part of the due notice requirement can be sufficiently accomplished simply by employing the designation “An Irrevocable Express Trust Organization,” or “An Express Trust Organization,” or “A Trust Organization,” or “Organized under Declaration of Trust,” beneath or next to the trust’s name. It must not be excessively revealing about the trust (the trustee has a duty to protect the privacy of the trust), but it also must not be misleading (the trustee has a duty to not compromise the integrity of the trust, though he is in no way prohibited from exercising the utmost shrewdness).140 

The second is that he should stipulate in plain and certain language, in all written contracts and obligations that the trust only is liable for its obligations and that neither the trustee nor interest-holders are to be held to any personal liability in the contract.141 He may also wish to cite the provision of the trust which so limits his and/or the interest-holders’ liability, but this is often unnecessary. And the trustee should always designate his title either under or immediately next to his name and signature.142 

The trustee should obtain a mailing address for the trust, and though he is the principal and holder of the trust property, I would recommend that he refrain from mixing the trust’s affairs with his own. He should also obtain all separate business necessities (telephone service, etc.) for the trust. (I would argue that he should do these things regardless of whether he is operating trust business or not. He should, for all intents and purposes, maintain a strict separation of the trust’s identity from his own.)

---

137Pennsylvania Co. v. U.S., supra.
138See People v. Rose, supra. 
139No state has ever made any attempt to prohibit Express Trusts (i.e., impair the contract rights of persons sui juris). However, many states have attempted successfully to prohibit associations, the most notable being the Ohio Attorney General in State v. Ackerman (supra), against C.F. Ackerman and ninety-nine other persons who were transacting business of guarantee and accident insurance in the state under the name of the Guarantee and Accident Lloyds, New York. The Attorney General alleged that they were doing business without having complied with the laws of the state or receiving proper authority from the state to do business of that kind. The court found that because the defendants were acting under mere association (as opposed to under declaration of trust), they were an association unlawfully exercising a franchise within the state, acting as a corporation therein without being legally incorporated. The court indirectly affirmed the well-understood principle scarcely in need of restatement that Express Trusts may engage in any manner of business allowed to individuals a natural right. In fact, to restate this principle over and over again would be “ostentatious.” Chisholm v. Georgia, 2 U.S. 419, 453 (1793). 

As public policy is a form of regulation, it should be noted the case of Munn v. Illinois, 94 U.S. 113, 126 (1876) in which the court expounded on the principle of regulation. Because the trust is of private property, and its business is private as well, the trust business is not “affected with a public interest.” It does not become affected with a public interest until the trustee participates in behalf of the trust in the unincorporated interstate banking association, obtains a business license or other franchise, contracts under it, or conducts the private business of the trust in a “manner to make it of public consequence, and affect the [14th Amendment] community at large. When, therefore, one devotes his property to a use in which the public has an interest, he, in effect, grants to the public an interest in that use and must submit to be controlled by the public [policy] . . . to the extent of the interest he has thus created. He may withdraw his grant by discontinuing the use; but, so long as he maintains the use, he must submit to the control.” 

140See McCoy, supra at p. 1.
141Id. 
142It has been suggested that whether the trustee designates his title or not, he is in-fact acting as trustee, because the substance not the form is what controls. However, for security purposes, I would argue that the designation should be applied in all situations, regardless. Doing so will avoid any superficial confusion. 