---
title: Express Trusts Under the Common Law
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Express Trusts Under the Common Law
    description: What is an express trust under Common Law?
---

THE MOST adequate definition of the Express Trust is to be understood from the earlier case law which has been eloquently summed up and restated into a clear, concise definition by Alfred D. Chandler, Esq.5 in the first of his two papers submitted as a report to the Tax Commissioners of Massachusetts on “voluntary associations” as part of a legislative investigation into their economic effect on the state in 1911. At page 6, he offers the following definition: 

> **Express Trusts . . . put the legal estate entirely in one or more [persons], while others have a beneficial interest in and out of same, but are neither partners nor agents. This simple, adequate, common-law right, any person or group of persons sui juris may exercise**, the Trustees issuing certificates of beneficial [and capital] interest divided into shares, as well as issuing bonds and other obligations, as freely as they open a bank account, have a pass book, and draw and circulate checks, **or make whatever contractual relations are allowed to persons as a natural right**. [Italics emphasis supplied in original; bold emphasis and bracket information added.] 

What becomes clear from this definition is that the Express Trust is not merely a property interest held by one for the benefit of another, but rather a private contract for the holding of a divisible property interest accepted by one at the offer of another, having full power to do whatever he may naturally do for himself as an individual sui juris,7 for the benefit of a third party of his choosing. What has been created here is a trust organization, purely sui juris. “As a general proposition, it may be asserted that one who creates a trust may mold it into whatever form he pleases, and that whatever one may lawfully do himself he may authorize another to do for him[,]”8 without receiving any benefit, privilege or franchise from any government or other outside-party;9 and, therefore they owe no duty to any government or other outside-party to the extent that no common-law criminal or civil wrong is the purpose of the contract.10 If this is so, then the trust is afforded all the common-law protections ordinarily given to private contracts, particularly the obligation of them.11 Now, the question is whether the parties to the contract are truly acting sui juris, i.e., of their pure, unadulterated common-law rights, because if the parties have prior contractual obligations which grant an outside party a vested interest in all their personal relations, then the contract has acquired a third-party overseer/intervenor.12 

---

5 Express Trusts Under the Common Law: A Superior and Distinct Mode of Administration, Distinguished from Partnerships, Contrasted with Corporations (1912). 
6 Mr. Chandler lucidly brought to the attention of the Massachusetts Tax Commission the misapplication of the term voluntary association to the Express Trust. It is well-settled that “[t]he term ‘association’ for income tax purposes taxable as a ‘corporation’ embraces ‘business trusts’, and what Congress did not intend to embrace within the term ‘association’ was a pure [express] ‘trust’, that is a trust of traditional pattern where property is conveyed by will, deed, or declaration to a trustee[.]” Pennsylvania Co. for Insurance on Lives and Granting Annuities v. U.S., 138 F.2d 869 (C.C.A.3 (Pa.) 1943). In Crocker v. Malley, 249 U.S. 223, 63 L.Ed. 573 (1919) the court made it clear that a pure Express Trust, active and functioning as such, has standing in law as a trust, not an association.
7 See Pres. Woodrow Wilson’s address before the American Bar Association, at Chattanooga, Tenn. (Aug. 31, 1910), entitled The Lawyer and the Community. He says that “Liberty is always personal, never aggregate; always a thing inhering in individuals taken singly, never in groups or corporations or communities. The individual unit of society is the individual.” It has long been held that trustees of Express Trusts have greater latitude than ordinary trustees, simply because such trusts, created by individuals sui juris, may do whatever individuals sui juris may do. 
8 Harwood v. Tracy, 118 Mo. 631, 24 S.W. 214, 216; also see Shaw v. Paine, 12 Mass. 293; “The person who creates a trust may mould it into whatever form he pleases.” Perry on Trusts, I, §§ 67, 287 (4th Amer. ed.); Underhill on Trusts, p. 57 (Amer. ed.). 
9 See Hale v. Henkel, 201 U.S. 43, 74 (1906). 
10Lawson on Contracts § 294, p. 381 (3d ed. 1923). 
11In Berry v. McCourt, 204 N.E.2d 235, 240 (1965) the court held that the Express Trust is a “contractual relationship based on trust form”; and in Smith v. Morse, 2 Cal. 524, it was held that any law or procedure in its operation denying or obstructing contract rights impairs the contractual obligation and is, therefore, violative of Article I, Section 10 of the Constitution. Because the Express Trust is created by the exercise of the natural right to contract, which cannot be abridged, the agreement, when executed, becomes protected under federally enforceable right of contract law and not under laws passed by any of the several state legislatures. 
In Eliot v. Freeman, 220 U.S. 178 (1911), the court made it clear that the Express Trust is not subject to legislative control. It went further to acknowledge the right-wise stance of the United States Supreme Court that the trust relationship comes under the realm of equity, based upon the common-law right of contract, and is not subject to legislative restrictions as are corporations and other organizations created by legislative authority. To clarify the equity and common-law distinctions, the basis for Express Trusts under the common law in this instance, is not that such organizations are creatures of common law, as distinguished from equity, but that they are created under the common law of contracts and do not depend upon any statute.