---
title: Prevailing in Legal Affairs
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Prevailing in Legal Affairs
    description: TBD
---

HERE IS WHERE we shall get into legal action, the rare instance of public legal affairs, such as defending a court action instituted against the trust (or trustee), a private action against the trust (or trustee), etc., as well as the possible necessity of the trustee to take a public (however rare) or private (most preferable) action against an outside party. The reader must keep in mind that the chances of an action being taken against a trustee who has properly limited his liability without fail are slim to none. And if an action is taken against him anyway, generally, such cases don’t make it past the crucial phase of determining jurisdiction. When one examines the definition of jurisdiction,158 the fog begins to clear. 

There are two territorial jurisdictions created by the Constitution: the first is “the Territory,”159 i.e., that designated portion of the earth’s surface (the imperially extensive real estate holdings of the nation) over which all power must be exercised within the strict letter of the Constitution; the second is the “other Property,”160 i.e., a territory unincorporated (not included) into the Union of states, over which all power may be exercised strictly according to the mere “spirit” of the Bill of Rights as interpreted by Congress outside the strict letter of guarantees of the Constitution and Bill of Rights. In the former, the federal government can have no direct control over the people but by way of bilateral contracts. But in the latter, the federal government can have full and direct control over people subject to its jurisdiction, “as they see fit, for the benefit of public policy regulations (known as codes & statutes) of this jurisdiction.”161 

Understanding that most courts currently in business in America are in fact, by the 1933 change in the operation of law, courts of limited jurisdiction,162 limited to cases involving subject-matter of the 14th Amendment public trust, it becomes clear that whether they are distinguished as federal courts or state courts, such is a distinction without a fundamental difference—they are inherently federal. In order to get at how such courts may obtain jurisdiction over an Express Trust or its trustee(s) in a legal action, the nature of jurisdiction should be briefly, but sufficiently examined. 

First, a court must have three essentials: jurisdiction to determine jurisdiction, jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the case (i.e., it must have the power/competence to decide the kind of controversy involved), and jurisdiction over the parties to the case (i.e., in personam or personal jurisdiction to compel the parties’ performance). If either one is lacking in any way, the court is without power to decide the case;163 and any order, decree or judgment, other than a dismissal, by such a court is void ab initio,164 having only the semblance or appearance of validity,165 and may be attacked directly or collaterally and vacated at any time.166 It is settled law that “a tribunal has jurisdiction to determine its own jurisdiction,”167 which brings us to the remaining two elements. 

Subject-matter jurisdiction is like the hub around which the wheel turns: without the hub, the wheel cannot turn with any real credibility. It is comprised of two parts: the statutory or common-law authority of the court to hear the case and the appearance and testimony of a competent fact-witness (i.e., sufficiency of pleadings). It can never be waived, and it cannot be obtained by lapse of time, consent of the parties, or any event other than the sufficiency of pleadings by the party bringing the suit (i.e., the plaintiff must sufficiently show beyond reasonable doubt that the court has jurisdiction to hear the cause). However, although it may have been established by the pleadings, it can still be lost due to, inter alia— 
* Fraud upon the court;168 
* The judge’s failure to follow proper procedure;169 
* The unlawful activity or undisclosed conflict of interest of the judge (e.g., involvement in a scheme of bribery);170 
* The court exceeding its statutory authority;171 
* Violation of due process;172 
* Improper representation of a party before the court, improper issuance of a summons, or defective service of process;173 
* Proper notice not being given to all parties by the movant;174 
* The court basing its order or judgment upon a void order or judgment;175 and * Violation of public policy.176 
And when subject-matter jurisdiction is lacking or lost, the court must discharge its ministerial duty to dismiss on that ground on its own motion, whether it has personal jurisdiction or not.177 

Given the preceding sections on the unincorporated banking association under H.J. Res. 192, and all of the above regarding the “other Property” nature of the states today, it is easy to see why these courts are ipso facto courts of limited jurisdiction, having no jurisdiction over subject-matter in “the Territory”. But assuming for the sake of explanation that subject-matter jurisdiction did exist, then personal (or personal in rem)178 jurisdiction over the trust and its trustee(s) can only be obtained in four ways, either by the trust’s or trustee’s— 
* **Presence**179 (i.e., its/his being served with a copy of the summons and complaint while physically present in the forum jurisdiction); 
* **Domicile**180 (i.e., residence alone is a basis for exercising jurisdiction. In the case of corporations, domicile is the state in which they are incorporated, and in the case of Express Trusts, the place of their situs); 
* **Permission or Consent**181 (i.e., a trustee either personally or on behalf of the trust, having not been properly served, can nevertheless give the forum court permission to exercise jurisdiction. Depending on the act of the trustee, permission can be given well in advance of any lawsuit filed and the consent can also be implied); and 
* **Minimum Contacts**182 (i.e., having sufficient dealings or affiliations with the forum jurisdiction which make it reasonable to require the trust/trustee to defend a lawsuit brought in the forum state. If the state has no contacts, ties or relations with the trust or trustee(s), personal jurisdiction cannot be obtained in this manner).183 The four principles regarding minimum contacts are, that: 
  1. The trust’s or trustee’s activity must be continuous and systematic in the forum jurisdiction, and the cause of action must be related to that activity; 
  2. Sporadic or casual activity of the trust or trustee(s) in the forum jurisdiction does not justify the exercise of jurisdiction in a cause of action unrelated to that activity; 
  3. If the trust’s or trustee’s contacts are sufficiently substantial and of such a nature as to make the exercise of jurisdiction reasonable, then general184 jurisdiction may be exercised by the forum over the trust or trustee(s); and 
  4. If the trust’s or trustee’s activity is sporadic or consists only of a single act, then specific185 jurisdiction may be exercised by the forum only when the cause of action arises out of that activity or act. 

Unlike subject-matter jurisdiction, once personal jurisdiction is obtained, it can never be lost. And if the trust (or trustee) permits or makes a general appearance, it cannot be later denied. Contrary to the general appearance which constitutes consent, the trust or trustee(s) may avoid personal jurisdiction by making a special appearance for the purpose of attacking the forum court’s personal jurisdiction,186 and may even attack, so to speak, subject-matter jurisdiction. Generally, a challenge to subject-matter jurisdiction constitutes consent, a waiver of personal jurisdiction for the purpose ofarguing the merits, but this doctrine does not apply to cases involving Express Trusts over which subject-matter jurisdiction clearly does not exist.187 

With presence, the trust is created and functioning in “the Territory,” doing business under the general common law,188 not the private international law of the unincorporated banking association. Presence can therefore only be construed to exist where the trust has become a member of the association via residence in a revenue district (indicated by ZIP code) or is engaged in a particular transaction. Even then, the trust or trustee(s) must be “present” by membership or transaction in that particular political subdivision (“State”) and given notice “reasonably certain”189 to reach them (i.e., service of process via either personal service, substituted service, or constructive service) as service by mere publication in a newspaper of general circulation has been held insufficient in such cases.190 (And, as a side-note, mere physical presence in a courtroom during some phase or proceeding does not constitute an appearance.)191 

With domicile, the situs of the trust is in the united States of America, designating “the Territory,” the Union of states as the land of which the common law is supreme law. Unless the trustee(s), in behalf of the trust, adopts a principal place in the “other Property,” establishes a residence in a place subject to the federal jurisdiction with the “intention to make it [its] domicile,”192 personal jurisdiction is lacking in this respect. It must purposely establish an address directly in a revenue district (e.g., via post office box, or street address) to be liable in this way. But if the trustee(s) contracts with a private mail service provider or carrier, signing “without prejudice,” then personal jurisdiction does not attach— this effects an exclusion of any third-party intervenor/overseer, and reserves the obligation to the course of the common law of contracts (i.e., bilateral contracts not trilateral ones). 

With permission, it may seem tricky but it is rather simple. Any answer to any presentment from a forum jurisdiction constitutes giving them permission to exercise authority, unless it is specifically a special appearance for the sole purpose of challenging their authority (personal jurisdiction). If the trustee(s) do not answer in general, or subordinate themselves, then consent has not been given. And if the trustee(s) (presumably under properly limited liability) enter into a contract under a forum-selection clause, then the forum selected will have personal jurisdiction. However, there are limitations to what constitute enforceable forum clauses, for if the clause is expressed in fine print, placed in the contract so as to avoid litigation,193 unreasonable or ambiguous,194 not “fundamentally fair,”195 or if the clause could not have been disputed without impunity as a part of a freely negotiated contract, then it is invalid. 

And with minimum contacts, the trust must purposely avail itself of benefits and services of the state196 (e.g., operating a business via license, “owning” property there, contracting with the government there, availing itself of benefits or services of the legal system there—court actions, using state property, utilizing police or fire services, etc.— systematically and continuously, or sporadically but substantially enough so as to warrant the trust or trustee(s) being compelled to come into the forum).197 I will not get into diversity of citizenship here, though it is wholly important to subject-matter jurisdiction in the federal courts, for it is highly improbable that it would even be necessary to bring it up in such an action, given all of the above “legal weapons” with which the Express Trust is naturally armed.198 

As a final note, when the Express Trust is taking an action against an outside party, the preferable method is via the Commercial Process, i.e., a private (out of court) legal action instituted under the fundamental rules of commerce/trade (Business). Lawsuits should be regarded as a last resort to secure judicial enforcement of a private administrative judgment, for public suits confer full personal jurisdiction upon the court (taking a claim to a legislative court avails the trust of several benefits and services of that forum, and thereby establishes a substantial minimum contact). Even still, any action for judicial enforcement of a private judgment can be done out of court pursuant to the Commercial Process. In private actions, the maxims of commerce, the foundation of all commercial law and western legal systems, govern— 

* **A workman is worthy of his hire**. Exodus 20:15; Lev.19:13; Matt.10:10; Luke 10:7; and II Tim. 2:6. Legal maxim: “It is against equity for freemen not to have the free disposal of their own property.” 
* **All are equal under the Law**. Law of God — Moral and Natural Law; Exodus 21:23-25; Lev. 24:17-21; Deut. 1:17, 19:21; Matt. 22:36-40; Luke 10:17; and Col. 3:25. Legal maxim: “No one is above the law.” “Commerce, by the Law of Nations, ought to be common, and not to be converted into a monopoly and the private gain of a few.” 
* **In Commerce Truth is Sovereign**. Exodus 20:16; Ps. 117:2; John 8:32; and II Cor. 13:8. Legal Maxim: “To lie is to go against the mind.” Oriental Proverb: “Of all that is good, sublimity is supreme.” 
* **Truth is expressed by means of an affidavit**. Lev. 5:4-5; Lev. 6:3-5; Lev. 19:11-13; Num. 30:2; Matt. 5:33; and James 5:12. 
* **An unrebutted affidavit stands as the Truth in Commerce**. 1 Pet. 1:25; Heb. 6:13-15. Legal Maxim: “He who does not deny, admits.” 
* **An unrebutted affidavit becomes the Judgment in Commerce**. Heb. 6:16-17. Any proceeding in a court, tribunal, or arbitration forum consists of a contest, or “duel,” of commercial affidavits wherein the points remaining unrebutted in the end stand as the truth and the matters to which the judgment of the law is applied. 
* **A matter must be expressed to be resolved**. Heb. 4:16; Phil. 4:6; and Eph. 6:19-21. Legal maxim: “He who fails to assert his rights has none.” 
* **He who leaves the field of battle first loses by default**. Book of Job; and Matt. 10:22. Legal maxim: “He who does not repel a wrong when he can, occasions it.” 
* **Sacrifice is the measure of credibility**. One who is not damaged, put at risk, or willing to swear an oath on his commercial liability for the truth of his statements and legitimacy of his actions has no basis to assert claims or charges and forfeits all credibility and right to claim authority. Acts 7, Life and Death of Stephen. Legal maxim: “He who bears the burden ought also to derive the benefit.” 
* **A lien or claim can be satisfied only through rebuttal by counter-affidavit point-for-point, resolution by jury, or payment**. Gen. 2-3; Matt. 4; and Revelations. Legal maxim: “If the plaintiff does not prove his case, the defendant is absolved.” 

---

158It is defined as “[a] government’s general power to exercise authority over all persons and things within its territory. . . . A court’s power to decide a case or issue a decree. . . . A geographic area within which political or judicial authority may be exercised. . . . A political or judicial subdivision within such an area.” Black’s Law Dictionary, p. 855 (7th ed. 1999).

159Art. IV, § 3, cl. 2 in reference to the incorporated “Union” of states incorporated under clause 1 of the same section. The Articles of Confederation were also incorporated into the Constitution under clause 1, and the Union of states is also incorporated under the Articles of Confederation by reference.
160Id. This “other Property” is known as “a territory”. Both “the Territory” and “other Property” signify property, since the language in that section is not “the Territory or Property”—the operative word is “other”. Therefore, “other Property” must be interpreted to mean “a territory,” as in a governmental subdivision which happened to be called “a territory,” but which could have been called a “province,” “colony,” etc. It refers to an incomplete state. See Ex Parte Morgan, 20 Fed. 298, 305 (D.C.Ark. 1883); and O’Donoghue v. United States, 289 U.S. 516, 537 (1933). 
161Brobst et al., supra, see footnote 126. 
162Such courts are defined as having “[j]urisdiction that is confined to a particular type of case or that may be exercised only under statutory limits and prescriptions. Also termed special jurisdiction.” Black’s Law Dictionary, p. 856 (7th ed. 1999). 
163See Abelleira v. District Court of Appeal, 17 Cal.2d 280, 109 P.2d 942 (1941). 
164See Holstein v. City of Chicago, 803 F.Supp. 205; Lubben v. Selective Service System Local Bd. No. 27, 453 F.2d 645 (C.A.1 (Mass.) 1972); Hobbs v. U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 485 F.Supp. 456 (D.C.Fla. 1980); and In re Adoption of E.L., 733 N.E.2d 846, (Ill.App. 1 Dist. 2000). 
165See Mills v. Richardson, 81 S.E.2d 409 (N.C. 1954). 

166See People v. Rolland, 581 N.E.2d 907, (Ill.App. 4 Dist. 1991); People v. Wade, 506 N.W.2d 954 (Ill. 1987); and In re Marriage of Welliver, 869 P.2d 653 (Kan. 1994).
167Albelleira, supra at p. 302. 
168See In re Village of Willowbrook, 37 Ill.App.3d 393 (1962); and Rook v. Rook, 353 S.E.2d 756, (Va. 1987). 169See Armstrong v. Obucino, 300 Ill. 140, 143 (1921). 
170See Code of Judicial Conduct; and the Alemann cases, Bracey v. Warden, U.S. Supreme Court No. 96-6133 (June 9, 1997). 
171See Rosenstiel v. Rosenstiel, 278 F.Supp. 794 (D.C.N.Y. 1967). 
172See Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 58 S.Ct. 1019 (1938); Pure Oil Co. v. City of Northlake, 10 Ill.2d 241, 245, 140 N.E.2d 289 (1956); and Hallberg v. Goldblatt Bros., 363 Ill. 25 (1936). 
173See Janove v. Bacon, 6 Ill.2d 245, 249, 218 N.E.2d 706, 708 (1955). 
174See Wilson v. Moore, 13 Ill.App.3d 632, 301 N.E.2d 39 (1st Dist. 1973). 
175See Austin v. Smith, 312 F.2d 337, 343 (C.A.D.C. 1962); and English v. English, 72 Ill.App.3d 736, 393 N.E.2d 18 (1st Dist. 1979). 
176See Martin-Tregona v. Roderick, 29 Ill.App.3d 553, 331 N.E.2d 100 (1st Dist. 1975). 
177See Morris v. Gilmer, 129 U.S. 315, 326-327 (1889). Once a judge has knowledge that subject-matter jurisdiction is lacking, he has no discretion but to dismiss the action, and failure to do so subjects the judge to personal liability. 

178That is to say, “against the thing” as though it were a person vested with legal rights, as is the case with proceedings against vessels under admiralty-maritime law. In proceedings in rem, the standards of Int’l. Shoe regarding fairness and substantial justice that govern in personam actions are applicable. See Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186 (1977).
179The physical presence of a defendant in the forum is a sufficient basis for acquiring jurisdiction over him, no matter how brief his stay might be, as long as it is served while present. See Pennoyer v. Neff, 95 U.S. 714 (1877). 180See Milliken v. Meyer, 311 U.S. 457 (1941). 
181See Hess v. Pawloski, 274 U.S. 352 (1927). Under this doctrine, a forum state can legislate that a nonresident motorist using its highways be deemed to have appointed a local official as his agent to receive service of process in any action growing out of the use of the vehicle within the state. But the state must have provided actual notice of this to the nonresident motorist beforehand. The obvious question is whether the trustee is a motorist, and whether the automobile is a vehicle— there is a significant difference. Nevertheless, consent comes in the form of a general appearance.
182See International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 (1945). Under this doctrine, the trust or trustee who has never set foot in the forum may nevertheless be subject to valid personal jurisdiction so as to be compelled to defend a lawsuit there provided that it/he has minimum contacts with the forum such that would not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. 
183The minimum contacts must have been had in the form of purposeful affiliation on the part of the trust or trustee(s). See Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235 (1958). 
184This is defined as “[a] court’s authority to hear all claims against a defendant, at the place of the defendant’s domicile or the place of service, without any showing that a connection exists between the claims and the forum state.” Black’s Law Dictionary, supra. In order for a court to assert general jurisdiction there must be substantial forum related activity on the part of the trust or trustee(s). See Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408 (1984). 
185This is defined as “[j]urisdiction that stems from the defendant’s having certain minimum contacts with the forum state so that the court may hear a case whose issues arise from those [specific] minimum contacts.” Black’ Law Dictionary, p. 857 (7th ed. 1999). 
186See Dickson v. Parker, 212 P. 42, 59 Cal.App. 778 (1922); and Brown v. Riner, 496 P.2d 907.

187A challenge to the subject-matter jurisdiction of the court where it is clear on the face of the record that subject-matter jurisdiction is lacking is not inconsistent with a challenge to personal jurisdiction. Moreover, since the court must dismiss on its own motion, an appropriate challenge to subject-matter jurisdiction aids the court in performing its duty. The defendant should therefore be allowed to point out lack of subject-matter jurisdiction without making a general appearance. Judson v. Superior Court, 21 Cal.2d 11, 129 P.2d 361 is to the contrary, but it has often been criticized (see 31 Cal. L. Rev. 342; 1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954), § 76, p. 346) and is overruled. Goodwine v. Superior Court, 63 Cal.2d 481, 485 (L.A. No. 28464. In Bank. Nov. 4, 1965).
188The general law merchant is embraced under general common law, i.e., the original and unique system of commercial law in the American states, in which there is no commerce regulation of Express Trusts accept in connection with income derived from corporate stock and physical franchises under art. I, § 8, cl. 1 and 3 of the Constitution. See William A. Fletcher, The General Common Law and Section 34 of the Judiciary Act of 1789: The Example of Marine Insurance, 97 Harv. L. Rev. 1513, 1514 (1984). 
189Mullane v. Central Hanover Tr. Co., 339 U.S. 306 (1950). 
190See Pennoyer, supra; and Burnham v. Superior Court of California, County of Marin, 495 U.S. 604 (1990). 191See Austin v. State ex re. Herman, 10 Ariz.App. 474, 459 P.2d 753. 
192Black’ Law Dictionary, p. 1473 (4th ed. Rev. 1968). 

193See Johnson and Johnson v. Holland America Line-Westours, Inc., 557 N.W.2d 475.
194See Deiro v. American Airlines, Inc., 816 F.2d 1360, 1364 (C.A.9 (Or.) 1987). 
195Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. Shute, 499 U.S. 585, 595 (1991); Hodes v. S.N.C. Achille Lauroed Altri-Gestione, 858 F.2d 905, 908 (C.A.3 (N.J.) 1988); and Shankles v. Costa Armatori, S.P.A., 722 F.2d 861, 866 (C.A.1 (Puerto Rico) 1983). 
196See World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286 (1980); Asahi Metal Industry Co., Ltd. v. Superior Court of California, Solano County, 480 U.S. 102 (1987); also see Dick Lancial, Benefits Accepted = Jurisdiction. 197See Helicopteros, supra; and Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Min. Co., 342 U.S. 437 (1952). 198A good case to review regarding the rule of “complete diversity” is Strawbridge v. Curtiss, 7 U.S. 267 (1806).