---
title: Maintaining Proper I.R.S. Relations
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Maintaining Proper I.R.S. Relations
    description: TBD
---

LAST BUT NOT LEAST, due attention must be paid to the Internal Revenue Service, for they are the lawful, legal entity, duly authorized to collect association dues (income taxes) from 14th Amendment citizens and other persons volunteering and availing themselves of the nonpayment of debt “privileges and immunities” under H.J. Res. 192, 12 USC § 95a, and 15 USC, ch. 41, § 1602(c)(d)(e). “They are considered as a debtor/creditor in a social security association (unchartered, unincorporated commune) whereby each person insures everybody else in the association by agreeing never to demand payment for debts. [It is] [u]nder this volunteer arrangement [that] these persons become primarily a U.S. citizen, secondarily a state citizen, ‘subject to’ [C]lause 1 of the 14th Amendment, while the literal 10th Amendment rights are forfeited.”199 

Persons under this system have only relative rights to life, liberty, and property, as they are converted into “privileges and immunities” and “civil rights”. As debtors, they have no absolute literal property ownership, for it has thus been converted to mere privilege of possession.200 Plainly put, IRS taxes serve the function of dues for the privileges and immunities associated with participating in the “federated unincorporated interstate banking association for the non ‘Payment of Debts.’”201 What’s more, the collection of income taxes is crucial to maintaining order within the association, more so than for any proposed funding of the association.202 

But that has no bearing on a properly created and administered Express Trust. It is well-settled that a trust, created by parties not availing themselves of such privileges and immunities, is not illegal even if formed for the purposes of limiting or avoiding taxes altogether.203 Nor is the Express Trust subject to federal excise taxes imposed on corporations.204 Nor is an Express Trust taxable merely because it possesses all the accessory powers possessed by corporations.205 Nor can the dignity of its trust instrument be set aside simply because a “tax benefit” results, whether by design or by accident.206 Frankly, unless it incurs a tax liability in the United States via a valid forum clause in a contract, membership in the unincorporated banking association, becoming an employer, employee, or worker, or corporate entity, deriving income from corporate stocks or physical franchises, accepting other “privileges and immunities” under the 14th Amendment, or availing itself of any other services or benefits of public policy invoking the doctrine of reciprocity, it has nothing to do with the IRS. 

However, as it might stand as a beacon of organizational liberty, the IRS has a reasonable interest in making sure the Express Trust example does not upset compliance on the part of the participants in the system, and the IRS, thus, takes every precaution to shoot down trusts of any kind which even hint at having origins lying outside of its jurisdiction, i.e., the “other Property”. The IRS also takes every opportunity to construe every instance (however rare) in which such a trust is dismantled in court as being attributable to some purported inherent unlawful nature of non-statutory trusts, going so far as to classify all as “abusive trusts,” though any trust (statutory or common-law, express, implied, resulting or constructive) which abuses the fundamental principles upon which equity rests is, technically, abusive. Yet, they never speak of them. The reader should be keen to know how to discern good information from dis and misinformation. 

In the event that the IRS takes an action against a purported “common law trust” or “pure trust,” (a.k.a. “poor trust”) it is generally a lawful action, actually in response to some unlawful activity on the part of the parties or defect in their relation. And your author has never seen an action taken against a properly drawn Express Trust, i.e., one drafted from the perfected language and form of that “best legal talent” to which the power and superiority of the Express Trust is attributed. Even in those cases, a thorough analysis of jurisdiction, such as the one treated in the previous section, sheds light on the blatant limitations of the IRS’s jurisdiction. The fact that they manage to establish subject-matter jurisdiction and personal in rem jurisdiction attests to the ignorance of the defendants, and indeed, personal jurisdiction usually would never have been obtained without the defendants’ unwitting consent.207 It is no secret that all actions of the IRS are commenced as proceedings in admiralty.208 

---

199Brobst et al., supra.
200“Debts . . . are not the property of the debtors; they are obligations of the debtors, and only possess value in the hands of creditors. With the creditor they are property [absolute][.]” Jones v. New Pittsburgh Courier Pub., 364 A.2d 1315, 469 Pa. 157, quoting In re State Tax on Foreign-Held Bonds, 82 U.S. 300, 320, 21 L.Ed. 179 (1872). Also see Beale, supra at p. 114.
201Brobst et al., supra at p. 14. 
202“If . . . government refrains from regulation [i.e., taxes] . . . the worthlessness of the money [i.e., credit] becomes apparent, and the fraud upon the public can be concealed no longer.” John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, p. 225 (1920 ed.). It has been argued that in 1930s America, with the outcry for quick-fixes as opposed to independent recovery, the public requested (democratically) any “fraud” which might be construed to have occurred, and is therefore a party to it, collaterally. 
203See Weeks v. Sibley, supra; and Phillips v. Blatchford, supra. 
204See Eliot v. Freeman, supra.; and Maine Baptist Missionary Convention, supra. 
205See Phillips v. Blatchford, supra; Gleason v. McKay, 134 Mass. 419 (1883); O’ v. Somerville, 190 Mass. 110 (1906); and Opinion of the Justices, 196 Mass. 603, 627 (1908). Also see The Personality of the Corporation and the State, 21 L. Qtly. Rev. 365, 370 (Oct. 1905). 
206See Edwards v. Commissioner, 415 F.2d 578, 582, (C.A.10 (Okl.) 1969). 
207In fact, Judge Robert H. Bork, from whose name the phrase “bork’d in the senate” was derived, is reported to have openly acknowledged, during one of his Senate confirmation hearings, that every prisoner in America today is there because he gave his permission to be imprisoned, in one way or another. (Supposedly, this is the reason why the Senators “bork’d” him so badly.)
208It is highly recommended that the reader read Are You Lost At Sea (1995), available at <http://www.friends-n-family-research.info/FFR/Merrill_AreYouLostAtSea.pdf> (last visited Aug. 10, 2005).