---
title: The Trust Corpus
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: The Trust Corpus
    description: TBD
---

THE BODY of the trust is the property being held in trust for the beneficiary(s), the very subject-matter of the declaration. It should be noted that virtually any thing24 may be held in trust, however, there are certain things which, given their innate traits recognized in Law, make for better subject-matter, so to speak. 

Initially, the legal minds who perfected the Express Trust in America did so to accommodate for the great obstacles in procuring special charters for corporations intended to deal in real estate, which trusts eventually came to be known as the “Massachusetts Land Trusts”. It was when those individuals came to realize the immense benefits of employing the trusts for the purpose of holding land, that they eventually expanded their utility to include the holding of personal property, which trusts eventually came to be known as the “Massachusetts Electric Companies,” and their perfection attributed to one time Attorney General and later United States Secretary of State Richard Olney;25 but the fact that the Express Trusts were initially, primarily utilized for purposes of holding and handling real estate is very significant, especially to our present situation. 

The significance derives, in pertinent part, from the integral relationship between the law and the land. It is a fundamental principle of law that the land and the law go hand in hand; and, in America, without the 14th Amendment, the Law of the Land is the Constitution with its common-law principles—and its substance of gold and silver.26 Without getting too deep into the operation of common law, it is this principle regarding the relationship of land and law that, by its operation, threw up an obstacle to corporate real estate ownership, for in order to charter a statutory (civil law) entity to handle the substance of the common law (land), special, if not extraordinary, legal circumstances must exist, which, prior to the removal of the fixed gold standard in 1933,27 i.e., the removal of the substance of the law, were nonexistent.28 A statutory entity is inherently accountable to courts of civil (legislative) jurisdiction, deriving subject-matter jurisdiction from the corporate charter. Whereas, an Express Trust is obviously inherently accountable to courts of equity,29 deriving subject-matter jurisdiction from the trust instrument. 

This brings us to today. In the jurisdiction of the 14th Amendment United States public trust, what is the substance of the common law is merely a commodity. But, back in the Republic the substance still remains the staple for payment of debts30 (though in considerably lesser quantity and without a fixed standard upon which to be traded). The Express Trust under the common law, holding real estate, silver or gold, is holding the very substance of the law under which it was created, thus ensuring that bond between law and land, and the powers and guarantees that come with it.31 

---

24 The “thing” held in trust is referred to as the trust res, the subject-matter of the trust. 
25 See John H. Sears, Declarations of Trust as Effective Substitutions for Incorporation, § 1, p. 4 (1911).26Referred to in this sense, it is regarded in law as portable land. The basic principle of law is that the land includes everything extracted from it. 
27 See House Joint Resolution 192 of June 5, 1933; Pub. L. 73-10. Prior to that, silver had already been de-monitized, in practice but not in fact, by the Coinage Act of 1873 (commonly referred to as the “crime of ‘73,” which, it is blatantly obvious, would have been unconstitutional if done in-fact. It is said to have been a tactic of congress to place in the public mind the perception of the currency as being solely backed by gold, presumably for the purpose of the eventual passing of H.J. Res. 192, which congress knew would effect a removal of the substance of law). Silver was later withdrawn from circulation in certain coins by the Coinage Act of 1964, and was removed entirely by amendment to the Coinage Act of 1964 by the Bank Holding Company Act of 1970. Then, all silver-backed certificates were discontinued in 1972. 
28 See Lee Brobst et al., The Law, The Money and Your Choice (2003), available at <http://www.usa-the-republic.com/Lee%20Brobst/The%20Law.html> (last visited Sept. 29, 2005). 29It should be noted that though the Express Trust is created under common law, it is not a creature of the common law as distinguished from equity, but rather, it is created under common law of contracts and not dependent upon any statutes; Equity supplements the common law. See Schumann-Heink v. Folsum,328 Ill. 321.  30See Constitution for the United States of America, art. I, § 10 (1789). 
31 See Constitution for the United States of America, amend. VII (1791). 